Transactions - HARD but important topic

Concurrent programming is not needed because of databases.
Games also can use database transactions. WOW example

Transaction manager coordinates the execution of the programs.

DATA = CELL in database, a specific column in a row.
TRansaction = block of statemenets
	ACID: 	atomicity : all or more IE all statements are completed or none. IMPORTANT
		durability : "all updates are persisted" IE everything is stored.
			db contains duplicates until commit/abort basically.
			2 ways: write ahead log AND shadow paging
		Isolation : "single-transactions view" - dbs thinks that the task is the only one in the db.
			Concurrent exectution means not serial. 
		Consistency : "no incosistent state" - if your db wa in correct state before it will be after NOT to IMPORTANT.
		

ex:
T1 transfer 100SEk to X from Q
=> 	
	read (X)
	x := X-100
	write(X)
	read (Q)
	Q:=Q+100
	write (Q)



Transaction state diagram

	  -> partially commited -> commited
	/	|
ACTIVE 	        |
	\      \|/
	  ->  failed -> aborted




EXAM PART
Transaction manager creates a schedule in what order to execute
2 transaction on same data can be scheduled as serial, ("sequential"). PRODUCES correct transaction but is slow.

concurrent schedule
task2 

reads from the first as soon as the value is updated by task1

How do we know if something is wron in the transactions. 
if a concurrent sequence can be converted to serial with same vlaues and output its seraialisable


if serial E serializable E all combinations.
HOW TO CHECK
conflict serializable, veryvery easy to implement
	DATAbases focus on if the writes are focusing oon the same item.
	1 if there consists 2 transactions
	2 they access the same object Q
	3 one of them tries to write to Q


Conflict equivalent - obtain the same number of operations and confliction operations.

its easy to detect which are conflict serializable.
Use graph theory,
	detedt the confliction operations, draw lines between. IF A cycle appears not serializable. 



pessimistic concurrency control- Let things happen then validates. If conflict rollback all. Good if not many conflicts.

optimistic - use "lock" and handle conflicts.
	W-lock (Q) most exclusive
	R-LOCK (Q) read only


TWO PHASE locking. 2PL
	When a transaction asks for locks when they are releasing the can not obtain more locks
	different levels

DETECTING DEADLOCK - ( deadlock is when two locks are locked by eachother ) 
wait for graphs 
	-- Chose victim to kill, ie restart to remove locks.
	

ANOMALIES
DIRTY READ - 		task 1 aborts after task2 have read the new value
NON-REPEATABLE READS -	
LOST UPDATES -		
PHANTOM READS - 	read table task2 insert into table 









